Embryonic Membranes

During the second week of development, with the embryo implanted in the uterus, cells within the blastocyst start to organize into layers. Some grow to form the extra-embryonic membranes needed to support and protect the growing embryo: the amnion, the yolk sac, the allantois, and the chorion. At the beginning of the second week, the cells of the inner cell mass form into a two-layered disc of embryonic cells, and a space—the amniotic cavity—opens up between it and the trophoblast. Cells from the upper layer of the disc (the epiblast) extend around the amniotic cavity, creating a membranous sac that forms into the amnion by the end of the second week. The amnion fills with amniotic fluid and eventually grows to surround the
embryo. Early in development, amniotic fluid consists almost entirely of a filtrate of maternal plasma, but as the kidneys of the fetus begin to function at approximately the eighth week, they add urine to the volume of amniotic fluid. Floating within the amniotic fluid, the embryo—and later, the fetus—is protected from trauma and rapid temperature changes. It can move freely within the fluid and can prepare for swallowing and breathing out of the uterus.

On the ventral side of the embryonic disc, opposite the amnion, cells in the lower layer of the embryonic disk (the hypoblast) extend into the blastocyst cavity and form a yolk sac. The yolk sac supplies some nutrients absorbed from the trophoblast and also provides primitive blood circulation to the developing embryo for the second and third week of development. When the placenta takes over nourishing the embryo at approximately week 4, the yolk sac has been greatly reduced in size and its main function is to serve as the source of blood cells and germ cells (cells that will give rise to gametes). During week 3, a finger-like outpocketing of the yolk sac develops into the allantois, a primitive excretory duct of the embryo that will become part of the urinary bladder. Together, the stalks of the yolk sac and allantois establish the outer structure of the umbilical cord. The last of the extra-embryonic membranes is the chorion, which is the one membrane that surrounds all others. The development of the chorion will be discussed in more detail shortly, as it relates to the growth and development of the placenta.

Embryogenesis
As the third week of development begins, the two-layered disc of cells becomes a three-layered disc through the process of gastrulation, during which the cells transition from totipotency to multipotency. The embryo, which takes the shape of an oval-shaped disc, forms an indentation called the primitive streak along the dorsal surface of the epiblast. A node at the caudal or “tail” end of the primitive streak emits growth factors that direct cells to multiply and migrate. Cells migrate toward and through the primitive streak and then move laterally to create two new layers of cells. The first layer is the endoderm, a sheet of cells that displaces the hypoblast and lies adjacent to the yolk sac. The second layer of cells fills in as the middle layer, or mesoderm. The cells of the epiblast that remain (not having migrated through the primitive streak) become the ectoderm. Each of these germ layers will develop into specific structures in the embryo. Whereas the ectoderm and endoderm form tightly connected epithelial sheets, the mesodermal cells are less organized and exist as a loosely connected cell community. The ectoderm gives rise to cell lineages that differentiate to become the central and peripheral nervous systems, sensory organs, epidermis, hair, and nails. Mesoderm differentiates itself into three subdivisions on both sides of the primitive streak. Those subdivisions are the paraxial  mesoderm which will become the axial cells skeleton and muscles, the intermediate mesoderm which will become the urogenital tract and the lateral plate mesoderm which will give rise to the anterior body wall and the outer lining of the gastrointestinal tract. The lateral plate mesoderm will split in two layers, the somatic (or parietal) layer and the visceral (or splanchnic layer) that surrounds the intraembryonic mesoderm. This cavity represents the future serous cavities of the trunk; such as the peritoneal, pleural and pericardial cavities. The somatopleure is the somatic layer of the lateral plate mesoderm and is in close contact to the ectoderm. The somatopleure will give rise to the lateral and ventral bodywalls of the embryo. The splanchnopleure is the visceral layer of the lateral plate mesoderm and is in close contact to the endoderm. The splanchnopleure will give rise to the outer layer of the gut tube. 

Organogenesis
Following gastrulation, rudiments of the central nervous system develop from the ectoderm in the process of neurulation. Specialized neuroectodermal tissues along the length of the embryo thicken into the neural plate. During the fourth week, tissues on either side of the plate fold upward into a neural fold. The two folds converge to form the neural tube. The tube lies atop a rod-shaped, mesoderm-derived notochord, which eventually becomes the nucleus pulposus of intervertebral discs. Block-like structures called somites form on either side of the tube, eventually differentiating into the axial skeleton, skeletal muscle, and dermis. During the fourth and fifth weeks, the anterior neural tube dilates and subdivides to form vesicles that will become the brain structures. Folate, one of the B vitamins, is important to the healthy development of the neural tube. A deficiency of maternal folate in the first weeks of pregnancy can result in neural tube defects, including spina bifida—a birth defect in which spinal tissue protrudes through the newborn’s vertebral column, which has failed to completely close. A more severe neural tube defect is anencephaly, a partial or complete absence of brain tissue.

The embryo, which begins as a flat sheet of cells, begins to acquire a cylindrical shape through the process of embryonic folding). The embryo folds laterally in the horizontal plane forming a cylindrical  shaped body and in the sagittal plane by tucking in the head and tail endsforming a C-shape. Both types of folding occur at the same time.. With the lateral folding, the lateral and ventral bodywall is formed which will lead to enclosure of the mesoderm and the endoderm; they become surrounded by the ectoderm, which later forms the skin. Lateral folding occurs because of rapid growth of internal embryonic structures that push the lateral lying structures of the embryo in a ventral direction.  At the same time theembryo tucks in a portion of the yolk sac, which protrudes with the umbilical cord from what will become the abdomen. The folding essentially creates a tube, called the primitive gut, that is lined by the endoderm. The amniotic sac, which was sitting on top of the flat embryo, envelops the embryo as it folds. Within the first 8 weeks of gestation, a developing embryo establishes the rudimentary structures of all of its organs and tissues from the ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. This process is called organogenesis. The gastrointestinal system develops too rapidly for the embryonic abdomen to accommodate it, and the intestines temporarily loop into the umbilical cord.  This is called a physiological hernia. During the 4th and 5th week of development, the developing kidneys and liver are relative big and take up a lot of space in the abdominal cavity, leaving no room for the intestine and therefore pushing the developing intestine in the umbilical cord. Over time, the abdominal cavity grows larger, making space for the intestine to return to the abdominal cavity. The temporary protrusion of the intestine in the umbicila cord is thus a part of normal development!  

